So let's get started by learning about what threats are and how they can be created in Java.
Demo will be done in the follow up lesson.
When there were no operating systems, computers ran a single program.
With just all the expensive, scarce system resources.
And that was very inefficient.
Operating systems then evolved to allow multiple processes to run concurrently.
And the process is nothing but a running program.
That is a program instance.
And each process gets its own resources, such as memory file handles and so on, just like the way
our VM gets its own memory from the underlying operating system.
And concurrency is achieved through multitasking.
Which is nothing but simply switching the CPU from one process to another.
So multitasking does not imply parallelism.
As CPU is being switched from one process to another, that is at any given instance of time.
CPU is still executing instructions from a single process.
However, the switching happens so fast that it gives us an illusion of parallelism, which is possible
only on a multiprocessor system.
And such scheduling is done for better resource utilization, as we discussed earlier.
Some concerns, such as resource utilization, also led to the development of threats.
And the thread is essentially a single sequential flow of control within a process.
That is, the statements within a thread are executed sequentially and a thread is part of a process.
And each thread is basically a lightweight process.
The process can have multiple threads.
And those threats share the resources that a process is allocated, like the memory and file handles.
But each thread has its own PC, own stack and local variables.
And benefits of threats include exploiting multiple processors.
That is, the threats you create can run on multiple processors and thus achieving parallelism and threats
also enable creation of loosely coupled designs.
And they also give better throughput even in single CPU machines when blocking tasks are involved.
And there are two types of threats.
One is demon threats, while the other is non demon threats.
Demon threats are background threads which are useful for tasks such as garbage collection.
So these threads run in the background.
Well, not even threats are created from within the application.
That is, these are the threads which our programs create.
Also when we start our program, Gvm also creates a thread to run the main method and it is referred
to as main thread.
So main thread is a non demon thread.
And so in a Java program there is always at least one thread.
So if we are not creating any threads then there is at least the main thread.
And G.M. will not terminate if there is at least one non demon threat which is running.
Now to understand threads, let's consider a simple analogy.
Let's just think that this box is a construction site where we have these workers.
Now we can think of this construction site as a process and these workers as threats in the process.
Now we know that these workers are useless unless we give them some work.
So we need to have some work for them.
In Java, threat terminology work is nothing but task.
So thread needs a task to execute, just like workers need work to work on.
So once we give them the work, the workers start working.
That is in our Java world.
Threads would start executing their tasks.
And in Java a thread is simply an instance of this class called thread or one of its subclasses.
And thread is from the package java dot line.
And the task that is the work is defined by a class which would implement this interface called reasonable,
which is also from the Java Lang package.
So there is a class while learnable is an interface and represents the worker, while reasonable represents
the work.
Now let's see how we can create a task, how we can create a thread and make the thread execute the
task.
Cross.
Let's see how we can create a task.
We just need to create a reasonable object.
And this is how you do it.
Basically, here Mineable is a class that implements a renewable interface and we simply instantiate
it.
Honorable interface has exactly one method called run.
So my class would define the task within the run method which it implements.
And the next step is to create the thread and give it its task.
And this is how you do it.
We simply instantiate the thread class and we initialize it with the task we created.
And we now see that the threat is in a state called New Threat would also go through a few different
states, as we will see now.
And the next step is to start the thread.
And for that we simply invoke the start method on the thread instance and nothing happens until we do
this.
And with this, a new call stack will be created for this thread and the run method will be pushed onto
the stack.
Just recall that every thread gets its own call stack.
And now the thread is said to be in a state called reasonable.
Reasonable does not imply that the run method is being executed and for that thread needs to get into
a state called running run.
As the word implies, the thread is just ready to run.
Now there is something called Threat Scheduler, which is responsible for moving the thread from state
to running state.
And once the threat is in running state, it's called stack would be active and the method on top of
the stack will be executed.
If it is the run method, then the run method would be executed.
And that scheduler is responsible for moving the thread back to vulnerable state to from the running
state so that it can move some other thread into running state from vulnerable state.
So thread scheduler is the component doing the switching between the threads.
Now we can see that there is also another state called Blocked, and there are a few reasons why a threat
can get into this state.
And one of them, as you may guess, is due to blocking during an input-output operation like read.
And just noticed that a thread can get into block state from only a running state and from the block
state it can get into a vulnerable state.
So from BLOCK State, it cannot directly get into running state and also it cannot get into block state
from the state.
So just keep that sequence in mind.
So that scheduler makes all the decisions about who runs, who doesn't run, and how long they run.
There is no guarantee on how the threat scheduler behaves.
Sometimes it may run a thread to completion, while some other time it may run a thread halfway, and
then it might do a switch to another thread.
So you should never, ever base your program's correctness on schedulers behavior.
In the next lesson, we will do a demo of creating threads and there we will also see how thread scheduler
behaves and we will see that we should not rely on it.
So that's about it for now.
Thank you.